PSMDB-2150 SBOMs (#1158)
percona/psmdb-docs: docs/sbom.md

    Trivy can, however, scan the SBOMs attached to Percona Server for MongoDB Docker images as OCI artifacts.

### Binary tarball

```bash
# Confirm the SBOM is bundled
tar tzf percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}-x86_64.<os_codename>.tar.gz \
    | grep doc/sbom.cdx.json

# Extract and scan
tar xzf percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}-x86_64.<os_codename>.tar.gz \
    -C /tmp percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}-x86_64.<os_codename>/doc/sbom.cdx.json
grype sbom:/tmp/percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}-x86_64.<os_codename>/doc/sbom.cdx.json
```

### RPM package

```bash
# Confirm the package installs the SBOM
rpm -ql percona-server-mongodb-server | grep sbom.cdx.json

# Scan it (replace `rhel:9.8` with your `<os_name>:<os_version>`)
grype --distro rhel:9.8 sbom:/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json
```

### DEB package

```bash
# Confirm the package installs the SBOM
dpkg -L percona-server-mongodb-server | grep sbom.cdx.json

# Scan it (replace `ubuntu:24.04` with your `<os_name>:<os_version>`)
grype --distro ubuntu:24.04 sbom:/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json
```

> 

Reviewer: We can also document using VEX files here. Below is the draft version of the suggested change:
``````
### Using the VEX File
One can also utilize the VEX file located at https://percona.github.io/percona-server-mongodb/vex/percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}.vex.json to filter out vulnerabilities that do not affect this particular Percona Server for MongoDB version:
```bash
curl -fsSLO https://percona.github.io/percona-server-mongodb/vex/percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}.vex.json
grype --distro <os_name>:<os_version> --vex=percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}.vex.json sbom:/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json
```

Note. At the time of writing, the example above only produces CVE-2026-6231, which only affects Percona Server for MongoDB if it uses Querable Encryption aka Field Level Encryption. This vulnerability has existed for a while rather then having been introduced in version {{ release }}, which only makes it visible via SBOM. We plan to fix the vulnerability in a future release.

``````

Feel free to change the wording for better clarity if required. Also, input from @radoslawszulgo may be helpful.

Reviewer 2: I think we've documented that in openvex section below?

    ```bash
    oras pull docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb@sha256:<sbom_artifact_digest>
    ```

3. Confirm that the SBOM file was downloaded:

    ```bash
    ls
    ```

    ??? example "Output"

        ```text
        percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}-amd64.cdx.json
        ```

## Filtering vulnerabilities with OpenVEX

[OpenVEX :octicons-link-external-16:](https://github.com/openvex/spec){:target="_blank"} is an open, minimal format for Vulnerability Exploitability eXchange (VEX) statements. A VEX document records whether a known vulnerability (CVE) in a component actually affects a given product — for example, the vulnerable code path is unreachable, the issue is already fixed, or it's still under investigation. Scanners that support VEX use these statements to suppress vulnerabilities that don't actually apply, cutting down on noise from CVEs in bundled dependencies that PSMDB isn't actually exposed to.

Percona publishes an OpenVEX document for every PSMDB release.

The `VEX` file for version {{ release }} is available at:

`https://percona.github.io/percona-server-mongodb/vex/percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}.openvex.json`

> Pass the document to Grype's `--vex` flag together with any SBOM scan on this page. For example, combined with the binary tarball scan:

Reviewer: Actually, the example below uses SBOM path from DEB/RPM package.
I suggest changing the phrase as below:

```suggestion
Pass the document to Grype's `--vex` flag together with any SBOM scan on this page. For example, combined with scanning an RPM package's SBOM:
```

Author: Reworded to "Pass the document to Grype's --vex flag along with any SBOM scan on this page. For example, when scanning the SBOM of an RPM package:"

        ```text
        percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}-amd64.cdx.json
        ```

## Filtering vulnerabilities with OpenVEX

[OpenVEX :octicons-link-external-16:](https://github.com/openvex/spec){:target="_blank"} is an open, minimal format for Vulnerability Exploitability eXchange (VEX) statements. A VEX document records whether a known vulnerability (CVE) in a component actually affects a given product — for example, the vulnerable code path is unreachable, the issue is already fixed, or it's still under investigation. Scanners that support VEX use these statements to suppress vulnerabilities that don't actually apply, cutting down on noise from CVEs in bundled dependencies that PSMDB isn't actually exposed to.

> Percona publishes an OpenVEX document for every PSMDB release, plus one combined document covering all releases and CVE statuses:

Reviewer: > , plus one combined document covering all releases and CVE statuses:

As discussed [here](https://github.com/percona/percona-server-mongodb/pull/2083#discussion_r3704072672), that "all realizes" VEX file can't work reliably and is better removed from the documentation.

@radoslawszulgo could you please confirm that?

Reviewer 2: confirm.  Let's remove these references in docs.
